Slug title - Introduction to Build



# **Build**
_From mapping to momentum – turn your canvas into a successful, impactful venture._

  
Welcome to **Build**. This is where you take the work you’ve done in completing your Social Lean Canvas and start making it real in the world.

The program is made up of two modules:
### **1. Improving your business model**

In this module we’ll:

- **Assess your customer, impact and economic models** to understand where the weaknesses and blind spots are.
    
- Explore the **different improvement levers** you can pull to strengthen each model.
    
- Take you through a **step-by-step process** to do this improvement work on your canvas.

### **2. Developing your strategy**

Here we take your newly improved Social Lean Canvas and turn it into a coherent strategy for making your venture happen. This includes:

- **Designing your strategy** – assessing your stage of development and creating stage-appropriate validation plans for each of your customer, impact and economic models.
    
- **Building your strategy** – pulling those validation plans into a sensible timeline that maps:
    
    - your **business model strategy** - proving that your business model will work and executing on it. 
        
    - your **organisational strategy** - building your venture's capacity to deliver the business model
        
    - and your **capital strategy** – how and when capital will come in to make your venture possible.
        

Let’s get started with **Improving your business model**.


