---
title: Customer Model
tags:
  - customer-model
  - video-content
  - business-model-design
---

NOTES
<span style="color:red">  Create a diagram for customer types that makes it clear what they are. Display this in customers and customer segments sections:</span>
- **Customer Types = Roles** ( users, buyers, funders, sponsors...)
    
- **Customer Segments** = sub-groups within a role (niches/audiences)



# Script

## Purpose 

### Overview

1. Your customer model outlines how you create value for your customers
    
2. Creating value for customers that you can get paid for is what drives your business model
    
3. Your customer model pulls together 4 key sections of you canvas
    

4. Your customers
    
5. The jobs they need done
    
6. The unique value proposition that they will respond to
    
7. And the solution you will give them that they (or another of your customers) will pay for
    

8. Your customer model could be very simple with a single group of customers who pay for a single simple product. Or it can be much more complex. And Social enterprises often tend to be more complex here than traditional ones
    
9. Developing this customer model is about understanding how these 4 canvas sections come together to form a coherent model of how you will create value for your customers
    

### Customers

CustomerModel.Customers.1

Your customers are those people or organisations that you need to move to make your business model work

1. You need to categorise them in 2 ways -  firstly your customer types and secondly your customer segments
    
2. Customer types  are the different categories of customer who play completely different roles in your business mode.
    
3. Some businesses only have one customer type, for example "the consumer who buys and consumes your product"
    
4. But in more complex business models, especially in social enterprise, there can be several customer types - for example
    

5. Users
    
6. Funders
    
7. Advertisers
    
8. Sponsors
    
9. Government buyers - all can be different customer types
    
10. With multiple customer types it is the combination of the different customer types that collectively creates the value needed for your business model to work
    

11. If you have more than one customer type try to colour code or number them in your canvas because each customer type will have a correspondingly different job to be done and a different unique value proposition
    

### Customer segments

CustomerModel.Customers.2

1. For your customer segments, these are the sub groups of customers that sit inside each of your customer types - for the canvas sketch the core customer segment that you are going to serve for each of your customer types
    

2. For example - if you have a customer type - users - your main User customer segment might be "stay home parents"
    

3. Keep your customers section simple. Include only those types and segments that you NEED to make you business model work.
    
4. Depending on your business model, your participants from your impact model might also be classified as customers (if they are people that you have to move to make your business model work) but if you don't rely on them for your business model to succeed then don't include them in your customers section.
    
5. Any extra customers you include in here that you don't actually need, will just add unnecessary complexity to your business model
    

##### Early adopters

CustomerModel.Customers.EarlyAdopters

1. Your early adopters are a small sub group of your customer segments who you think will have the strongest desire for your solution. For example - for our Customer type  Users and our customer segment of "stay home parents" our early adopters might be "stay home parents who have just had their first child"
    
2. These will be the customers who you will engage with first to learn from and test out your ideas
    
3. Only include early adopters for customer types that will be in significant numbers. If the customer type is, for example a single government funder then there is no need to identify early adopters here, because they are the single customer, they don't represent a larger market that you are planning to sell to.
    

### Jobs to be done

CustomerModel.Jobs

Filling in the Jobs to be done section of the canvas is about understanding what is motivating your customers. What will drive them to engage with your solution? What Job is your customer going to hire your product or service to do for them?

1. Make sure you go deeper here than just the obvious need the customer has, dig deep to find the particular thing that YOU will do for them that isn't currently available to them somewhere else
    
2. Identify at least one key Job to be done for each of your customer types
    
3. Colour code or number each job to be done, so you can see what customer type they relate to 
    

Clearly identifying and understanding the Job that your customer needs done is really important, it's the basis for how your business model will create value for them.

  

#### Existing alternatives

CustomerModel.Jobs.ExistingAlternatives

Existing alternatives show how your future customers are currently getting these jobs done and this is important for 2 main reasons

1. Firstly it shows evidence of customer need - if your potential customers are already engaging with an existing alternative,  it shows that the customer actually does wants this job to be done in real life.
    
2. Secondly is starts to outline who your competitors might be showing you who is already out there doing these jobs for your customers.
    
3. You might also find that you are competing against an existing alternative of "just doing nothing" . This is important to identify early, because if your future customers are not currently trying to get these jobs done, then it could mean that they don't really care about getting them done after all.
    

### UVP

CustomerModel.UVP

Your unique value proposition describes the benefits that your customers are going to get from using your product or service. A UVP is based on the particular Job that your customer is trying to get done and the special way that you are going to do this job for them.

1. This is not the same thing as the solution section of the canvas, where you describe your product or service. This is about describing the benefit that the customer will get from using your product or service
    
2. If you have more than one customer type you will have a different Job to be done for each different customer type, and likewise you will have different Unique Value Propositions for each as well. Number or colour code these the same way you did for the jobs to be done section
    

The unique value proposition section is where you demonstrate that you have deeply understood your customers. You have understood what they are trying to achieve, what value they are trying to get and how to talk to them about it.

  

### Solution

CustomerModel.Solution

The last section to fill in in your customer model is the solution section. This part of you canvas is where you describe what your enterprise actually does. Your product or service.

1. Your solution is what's going to deliver the value to your customers in a way that at least some of them will pay for
    
2. As well as this, your solution also needs to deliver the social or environmental impact that is mapped out in your impact model. So make sure you describe the parts of your solution that deliver the activities in your impact model
    
3. Keep the description of your solution simple and high level. You don't need to go into great detail, but make sure that you cover off the key aspects of it, so that it clearly shows how it's going to create both customer value and impact
    

  

## Example of customer model - Facebook

CustomerModel.Example.FB.Intro

Add in example videos and diagrams

  

As a way of demonstrating how the customer model works, let's walk through an example using the early days of Facebook and their customer model. Now Facebook isn't an impact driven organisation but the'll be useful here.

They are a company you should already be familiar with, as well as being an example that has more than one customer type. 

1. For this example we are going to talk about the simple version Facebook from when they first started out. Not the behemoth that they are today.
    
2. When they started their vision was simple, become the largest social network on global university campuses.
    

### Customers

1. So lets get into it, starting with the customers section of their canvas - At the start, Facebook had 2 different customer types in mind
    
2. Firstly - Users - people who will use the social network
    
3. and secondly - Advertisers - Organisations who will pay to have their ads viewed by Facebook's users - so those are the two distinct types of customers who are getting 2 completely different types of value out of facebook
    
4. Next - for their customer segments - we zero in on the markets within each customer type that Facebook will actually try to serve
    
5. For Users - they zeroed in on university students as their main user customer segment. Of course as they grew and succeeded they broadened this out to include many many more segments. But to start with they were tightly focused on students
    
6. Their early adopters in this student customer segment  were (and i'm guessing here) something like "dorm room students who are living away from home for the first time". They would likely have more of an immediate social need to be filled than other students
    
7. For the Advertiser customer type - they would zero in on the kinds of advertisers who are often targeting students and would value Facebook's unique value proposition to do this more effectively. This might include the fashion or music industry advertisers or other entertainment industry advertisers
    
8. For early adopters in this Advertiser customer segment - they would again zero in and find a smaller advertising segment that is currently working hard reach students that they can start with - this might be "local event promoters"  
      
    

###  Jobs to be done  
    CustomerModel.Example.FB.Jobs  
      
    

13. Now moving on to the Jobs to be done section of their Canvas
    
14. For the student User customer type - the job they are trying to get done might be something like "Meeting people and making new friends"
    

15. The Existing alternatives to do this job might include joining clubs and sports groups or going to bars and attending parties
    

16. For the Adver tiser type - The Job to be done could be "finding more effective methods of reaching our target audiences"
    

17. The Existing alternatives for this might be "un-targeted online banner advertising or traditional print advertising etc"  
      
    

### Unique Value Proposition  
    CustomerModel.Example.FB.UVP  
      
    

19. Now the Unique value proposition
    
20. For students the Unique Value Proposition might be something like "easily meet and connect with new friends in a low social risk way"
    
21. For advertisers it could be "Highly targeted advertising that guarantees you better engagement and higher click through rates"
    
22. You can see here that the Unique value propositions map directly to the jobs to be done that each different customer type has. This is how you translate the need that the customer has, into clearly articulated value that you can provide for them.
    

### Solution  
    CustomerModel.Example.FB.Solution  
      
    

24. And for their solution section,
    
25. Their solution description needs to tie together both of their customer types (and also if Facebook was an impact driven enterprise, it would need to describe their impact activities as well)
    
26. Facebook's early solution description would be something like - "An online social media application that creates a student social network, that also provides a highly targeted advertising platform."  
      
    

### Conclusion  
    CustomerModel.Example.FB.Conclusion  
      
    

28. You can see using this simple example of Facebook, that all of these sections of the canvas need to fit together in a coherent way, to form the customer model. They need to clearly outline how the customer model creates value for customers, in a way that Facebook can earn its revenue.
    
29. The value it creates for its Users by getting an important job done for them, in turn creates the ability for Facebook to sell a different kind of value to its advertisers. All of these pieces need to work together to create a powerful customer model that can succeed.
    


**CustomerModel.Overview**
1