---
title: Economic Model
tags:
  - economic-model
  - video-content
  - business-model-design
---


# **Economic model

### Overview  
EconomicModel.Overview


1. Once you have developed the first versions of your customer and impact models  it is time to lay out your economic model
    
2. Your economic model shows how your enterprise will take the value you create for your customers and turn it into an engine that will power the social value that is created by your impact model
    

3. Where your customer and impact models drilled in on the micro of understanding how you create value and change, starting with individuals,  your economic model will focus on scale
    
4. Now Scale doesn't necessarily mean that your enterprise needs to become huge. Sometimes small is the right size for achieving your goals, 
    
5. Scale here, is about understanding the dynamics by which your enterprise is going to operate at the size you need it to get to to achieve those goals.
    
6. Your economic model is going to unpack:
    

7. How you are going to reach and serve your customers at the scale you need. 
    
8. How your financial model will work to ensure that you are financially sustainable and (if it is one of your goals) Profitable
    
9. And Thirdly it is also going to be where you identify the key points of leverage that your business model is going to take advantage of in order for you to succeed
    

10. These components all need to hold together in a coherent model (your economic model), that you and your supporters can understand and have confidence in.
    

### Channels  
EconomicModel.Channels

1. Channels are how you enterprise connects with your customers at scale, and there are two distinct component to channels
    

2. Firstly the channels through which your customers find you and become your customers. These are known as your customer acquisition channels or marketing channels
    

3. They could be things like: online advertising, word of mouth, affiliate networks, print advertising, store frontage etc.
    

4. The second component of channels covers how your product or service gets to your customers. These are known as your distribution channels.
    

5. They could be things like: a retail location, courier delivery, delivery through an online platform (like amazon), physical classroom delivery, sales through a distribution partner etc  
    

6. Both of these these things are crucial to understanding how your economic model will work at scale.
    

7. You will need to be able to prove that your channels will be effective at providing what your business model needs
    
8. Also channels usually incur significant costs, so you need to be able to model these costs to feed into your financial model
    

  

### Financial model   
EconomicModel.FinancialModel.Intro

1. The revenue and costs components of your economic model, come together to form the beginnings of your Financial model - this shows the way money works for your enterprise at scale.
    
2. This is about proving that the revenue that you get from your customers will be enough to cover the cost of delivering your product or service to your customers, as well as delivering the activities that your Impact model requires
    

3. This will show that your business model works as a single whole integrated system. That all of the pieces come together to create something that can at least sustain itself financially and turn a profit if that is your goal
    
4. In this first pass through the canvas, start by listing your business model's main revenue and cost items
    

###  Revenue  
    EconomicModel.FinancialModel.Revenue
    

6. For revenue, this will include all forms of regular income that your business model will generate.
    

7. This could be in the form of: Sales, Donations, Grants, Sponsorship and other forms of income.
    
8. But remember that we are looking to understand what your financial model looks like at scale. This is not about how you get there. So only include revenue that will be there when you are at scale, not things like the funding you will use in the startup phase.
    

### Costs  
    EconomicModel.FinancialModel.Costs
    

10. For costs this might include:
    

11. The costs involved with making your product or service
    
12. Marketing costs
    
13. Distribution costs
    
14. And the costs of delivering your impact activities
    
15. This will also include any other major ongoing costs that your business model will have to cover
    

16. Keep all of this simple and high-level to start with. This will give you the shape of your financial model and allow you to assess it's viability, as well as what might need to change about it.
    
17. Over time you will add in more detail as you move your enterprise forward and test the revenue and cost assumptions in this model
    

### Advantage  
EconomicModel.Advantage.1Leverage

1. The advantage section of your economic model is about understanding what is powerful about how your business model works
    
2. What is the leverage that is generated in your business model, that, when you reach the scale you are going for, will make your business model successful?
    
3. If there is no powerful advantage, you will not be able to make your revenue greater than your costs long term. That is... you won't be financially sustainable.
    
4. All businesses need to have one or more fundamental dynamics that make them work. It is possible to have a product that people want and will pay for, channels to reach customers through and the ability to deliver this at scale but to never be able to make the economics work. This is because there is not enough leverage in the business model. No matter how hard you try you just can't make your revenue greater than your costs. You need an advantage in the form of some type of leverage to make the difference.
    
5. This advantage could take be...
    

6. Owning a crucial piece of intellectual property that others don't have
    
7. Having access to a key resource at a discount or for free
    
8. Benefiting from powerful network effects
    
9. Having valuable brand associations - like a celebrity endorsement
    
10. Access to free or cheap capital - for example if there is impact investment that is available at better terms than your more commercial competitors can get
    
11. Or some other form of leverage.
    

Advantage 2  
EconomicModel.Advantage.2Innovate

1. The Advantage section of your canvas is often where you can innovate on your business model. It is the place where you can brainstorm how your business model can be improved by finding an advantage that you can build on. This is especially important if, after sketching your financial model, you find that the numbers don't really stack up.
    

  

### Example: Facebook  
EconomicModel.FB.Example.Overview

Let's walk through the example of Facebook to practice how to develop your economic model using Facebook. There isn't an impact component to consider for Facebook, but it will be a useful and familiar model to work through all the same

### Channels  
    EconomicModel.FB.Example.Channels
    

Firstly channels

1. Facebook's customer acquisition channel for its user customer type was mainly via viral word of mouth. People who became Facebook users then invited their friends and as each user invited, on average, more than one other user, customer numbers grew exponentially
    
2. For its advertiser customer type facebook used a direct sales channel, selling adds to businesses and later a self-serve digital sales channel.
    
3. Facebook's distribution channel was its online website application and later its mobile application
    

  

### Financial model  
    EconomicModel.FB.Example.FinancialModel
    

  For its financial model

The basics of Facebooks Revenue and Costs would look something like:

###  For revenue - 
x advertising dollars per user per hour of engagement. Then perhaps a projection of how much revenue they would expect at scale based on numbers of users and the average level of engagement from these users
    
### For costs 
- it would include things like:
    

3. Development costs to maintain and improve the product
    
4. Hosting and bandwidth costs for delivering the product
    
5. Sales costs for selling to advertising buyers
    
6. And other business and staffing costs
    

7. For this first pass through the canvas, we keep the numbers high-level and then develop the financial model in more detail over time.
    
8. The key important thing to understand in Facebook's financial model is... if the customer and impact models are both correct, can facebook succeed from a financial perspective?
    

###  Advantage  
    EconomicModel.FB.Example.Advantage
    

10. In the advantage section we are looking for the powerful business model dynamics that will cause Facebook to succeed
    
11. There are 2 main advantages here, 2 "forms of leverage" that makes facebook's business model so strong
    

12. Firstly they can grow incredibly quickly at almost zero cost. While other businesses have to recycle large amounts of their revenue back into acquiring expensive new customers, facebook's users did this job for them for free. They were able to grow to over 2 billion users without paying for customer acquisition the way other online businesses have to.
    
13. Their second main point of leverage was the network effects they generated - this is the dynamic by which the value of their service goes up with every new customer they add. The more people there are on facebook the more valuable it is to each user because there are more people that they can connect with.
    
14. Both of these points of leverage created an unstoppable advantage for facebook. They could add users very cheaply and quickly, and every new user they added made their platform better and better. This created a virtuous cycle that no other social network could compete with. 
    
