---
title: Impact Model
tags:
  - impact-model
  - video-content
  - business-model-design
---

**

# Impact model

### Overview  
ImpactModel.Overview 

1. Just as your customer model describes how you create customer value, your impact model shows how you create social value
    
2. It shows how your activities are going to generate positive social or environmental outcomes that will then create long-term impact
    
3. Based on what you have described in your purpose section, your impact model will show the chain of causality, the logic by which your intentions will translate into impact that will actually occur in the world
    
4. This gets you beyond mere hopes and assumptions about the positive change you are going to cause, and gets real about how this will actually happen.
    


ImpactModel.Overview.Context

  

5. Depending on what you are trying to achieve, your impact model will be more or less complicated
    
6. This template will allow you to sketch out each component of your impact model as a simple starting point for you to build on
    
7. This is just one template for developing an impact model. There are many others. Feel free to use a different one if you know it better, or it is one used by your organisation, funder or a programme you are in.  
    
8. If your impact model is pretty simple, you may just have a single line that maps you impact from issue through to final impact. But if it is more complex, then you may have several, and they may interact in complex ways.
    
9. If this is the case it is going to take a bit more time and effort to develop your impact model
    
10. That said, also make sure that you aren't making your impact model more complex than it needs to be. It can be tempting to add in every positive thing that your business could do. But keep it simple by focusing only on the impact components that truely align with your purpose.
    

  

### Disclaimer  

ImpactModel.Overview.Disclaimer

  

1. This impact logic you are creating here tells the story of how the things you do will address real issues for real people in a predictable and measurable way. But of course there are often many more factors causing these issues than you could hope to address on your own
    
2. Complex problems cannot be solved with one simple fix.
    
3. So your impact model needs to reflect that you understand the system that is producing the issue that you want to solve and that, based on this understanding,  your intervention (often in conjunction with other's work) will influence the system in a significant and positive way.
    

### Issue  
ImpactModel.Issue

1. The Issue section of your impact model draws directly from your Purpose statement. This issue is the thing you are really trying to address with your enterprise, the problem you are trying to solve.
    
2. For this first pass through the canvas, describe the Issue in a high-level way.
    
3. But even though you are only going to describe simply here in the canvas, you do need to understand it deeply, or be on the journey to understanding it deeply, otherwise you can't hope to do anything genuinely useful about it.
    

### Participants  
ImpactModel.Participants

  

1. The participants in your impact model are your stakeholders, the people or organisations, who will participate in your impact activities.
    
2. This will include any core beneficiary groups that you are serving as well as other key people and organisations who will engage with you on your impact activities
    
3. A participant might also be a customer in your customer model if they play a key role in making your broader business model work
    

### Activities  
ImpactModel.Activities

1. Your Activities are the things that your participants will do because of your enterprise.
    
2. They will ultimately lead to the impact that you want to have
    
3. Activities could be for example... a participant group - attends a training programme you offer, installs solar lighting, plants trees, receives medical treatment, things like that.
    
4. It'll be different for every impact model, but the activities need to be the things that ultimately cause the impact to happen
    
5. These Impact activities will also be outlined as part of your solution in the solution section of your customer model.
    
6.   
    

7. >>>>This would be the case if say you were selling low cost solar lighting to low income families. The families would be a customer in the customer model as well as a participant in the impact model. The key difference here is that in the customer model you are trying to show that they (as the customer) will pay for the solar lighting, to prove that your business model can generate income, and in the impact model you are mapping the positive outcomes that will result from them buying and actually using the lighting.
    
8. >>>>For the customer model buying the lighting is enough, but in the impact model you need to be able to show that they use it and that measurable positive change will result over time
    

### Short-term outcomes  
ImpactModel.ShortTermOutcomes

1. Following from the activities you need to map out the short-term outcomes that will flow from them.
    
2. These are positive outcomes that will result immediately from your activities and be the first small step towards the impact that you are trying to have
    

### Medium-term outcomes  
ImpactModel.MediumTermOutcomes

1. Medium-term outcomes are the positive changes that will follow on from your short-term outcomes. They are the measurable changes that are going to occur over the next say, 1-2 years, as a direct result of your short-term outcomes
    

### Long-term outcomes  
ImpactModel.LongTermOutcomes

1. Your long-term outcomes are the long-term positive changes that will follow your short and medium-term outcomes
    
2. Perhaps across a 2-10 year time horizon
    

### Impact  
ImpactModel.Impact

1. The final Impact section of your impact model describes what the state of the world will be like when you have achieved your purpose
    
2. It is the destination of your activities and you short, medium and long term outcomes.
    
3. It should be simple, short and high-level. It's okay for this to be a bit abstract. The detail you capture in your outcomes make it concrete. 
    
4. It is describing the world after all of the steps of your impact model have been delivered on.
    

  

## Example - educational mentoring service -  
ImpactModel.Example.Intro

1. Let's walk through an example to help understand how to fill in your impact model
    
2. Imagine an enterprise that delivers its impact through providing mentoring programmes for kids who are getting kicked out of school for behavioural issues
    
3. This is a fake enterprise just for the sake of understanding the process
    

  

### Issue  
    ImpactModel.Example.Issue
    

The issue would relate to the enterprise's purpose statement. The issue might be something like "young people are falling out of school because they aren't getting the support they need to overcome solvable problems. This is creating long-term issues around lack of employment, lack of self-esteem and other social issues affecting them, their families and the wider community”

  

### Participants  
    ImpactModel.Example.Participants
    

Participants will be the various key stakeholders that they need to work together in the impact model. for example

1. Firstly Students - say... "students between the ages of 14-17, at schools in low income communities who are getting excluded from school for behavioural issues"
    
2. And secondly Teachers - "Specialist teaching staff who are tasked with managing students with behavioural issues"
    

  

### Activities 

ImpactModel.Example.Activities

For Activities  there might be a couple of main components

1. One might be - Students attend a weekly mentoring programme which comprises one-to-one mentoring as well as group work
    
2. A second one might be -mentor staff work with specialist teachers to collaborate on a plan to support the student through their journey 
    

  

### Short-term outcomes  
ImpactModel.Example.ShortTermOutcomes

For short-team outcomes these are the immediate things that will happen as a result of the activities. This can be a mixture of "outputs" and "outcomes". and might look like:

1. Students regularly attend the mentoring and group sessions
    
2. Each mentor/student paring produces a plan
    
3. Specialist teachers engage with mentors on the above plans
    
4. Students feel engaged in the process
    

  

### Medium-term outcomes  
ImpactModel.Example.MediumTermOutcomes

And medium-term outcomes... what happens over the next 1-2 years. Perhaps:

1. Students feel more engaged at school, have better attendance and get in less trouble
    
2. And - they are achieving better results in their school work at the end of the year
    

### Long-term outcomes  
ImpactModel.Example.LongTermOutcomes

Long-term outcomes... what happens over the next 2-10 years

1. Students are more likely to finish school and achieve in their results
    
2. They are more confident in their learning and abilities
    
3. They're more prepared to find stable employment
    
4. And they are less likely to experience negative social outcomes like addiction and violence
    

### Impact  
ImpactModel.Example.Impact

Impact... what ultimately is going to happen as a result of this enterprise?

1. Something like - "Young people who experience challenges in life are going on to become happy, healthy and valuable members of the community"
    
2. Now it's important to note that this enterprise will not be able to claim that they alone will have caused this impact.
    
3. But by fleshing out their impact model and measuring their outcomes over time they can prove (and need to be able to prove) that 1. the long-term outcomes they predict are in fact occurring and 2. that the work they are doing is a significant cause of these outcomes
    

**ImpactModel.Overview**
1